#### Procedural Content Generation

In the very end of the last class, we very briefly talked about a simple method to create a random result in our 2D arrays via a random walker.

the algorithmical creation of game content with limited or indirect user input

A key term here is “content”. In our definition, content is most of what is contained in a game: levels, maps, game rules, textures, stories, items, quests, music, weapons, vehicles, characters, etc. 

In computer graphics, procedural generation is commonly used for creating textures, but for games it can

#### Why use PCG? Why industry move to PCG?

Can overcome the storage limitations of computers. The earliest graphical computer games were severely limited by memory constraints. This forced content, such as maps, to be generated algorithmically on the fly: there simply wasn't enough space to store a large amount of pre-made levels and artwork. Pseudorandom number generators were often used with predefined seed values in order to create very large game worlds that appeared premade. As computer hardware advanced and CDs became able to store thousands of times as much data than was possible in the early 80s, using procedural generation to build large worlds became unnecessary. Game content such as textures and character and environment models are often created by artists beforehand, so to keep the quality of content consistently high.

People are slow compared to computers, games expanding in complexity, man months, cost, etc leading to decreased creative risk taking. Storing unique designs in the game's memory, rather than producing multiple objects using similar guidelines allows a variety of detailed models that are each substantially different. However, when each model needs to be designed by hand, a limited number of objects will exist. Some initial approaches to procedural synthesis attempted to solve this problem by shifting the burden of content generation from the artists to programmers who can create code that automatically generates different meshes according to input parameters. (speedtree)

PCG can augment the creativity of humans, enabling small teams to create lots more than they could on their own

PCG can enable completely new types of games

PCG can respond to the player's 'needs'

PCG can produce things that we can't

PCG can produce novelty - through "randomness"

PCG can help us think about design: computer scientists say "you don't understand a process until you have implemented it in code." Creating software that can competently generate game content could help us understand process by which we can "manually" generate the content, and clarify the affordances and constraints of the design problem we are addressing. PCG --> improved design process --> improved PCG --> improved design process --> 

#### Gamez

Perhaps the first game to use a seed to generate the world is Richard Garriott's Akalabeth (1980); by using the same seed number, a player can always return to a given world.[3] The Sentinel supposedly had 10,000 different levels stored in only 48 and 64 kilobytes. An extreme case was Elite, which was originally planned to contain a total of 248 (approximately 282 trillion) galaxies with 256 solar systems each. The publisher, however, was afraid that such a gigantic universe would cause disbelief in players, and eight of these galaxies were chosen for the final version.[4] Other notable early examples include the 1985 game Rescue on Fractalus that used fractals to procedurally create in real time the craggy mountains of an alien planet and River Raid, the 1982 Activision game that used a pseudorandom number sequence generated by a linear feedback shift register in order to generate a scrolling maze of obstacles. 

Elite is one of the early games that solved this problem by storing the seed numbers used to procedurally generate eight galaxies each with 256 planets each with unique properties.

Beneath Apple Manor - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b-AHgmV5pbo

Another classical example of the early use of PCG is the early eighties’ game Rogue, a dungeon-crawling game in which levels are randomly generated every time a new game starts. Automatic generation of game content, however, often comes with tradeoffs; Rogue-like games can automatically generate compelling experiences, but most of them (such as Dwarf Fortress) lack visual appeal.

Diablo is an action role-playing hack and slash video game featuring procedural generation for creating the maps, the type, number and placement of items and monsters.

The Elder Scrolls II: Daggerfall

PCG is a central feature in Spore where the designs
the players create is animated using procedural animation techniques. These personalized creatures are then used to populate a procedurally generated galaxy.

Civilization IV [10] is a turn based strategy game that allows unique gameplay experience
by generating random maps.

Minecraft [19] is one of the recent popular
indie games featuring extensive use of PCG techniques to generate the whole world
and it’s content.

Spelunky [39] is another notable 2D platform rogue-like indie game
that utilizes PCG to automatically generate variations of game levels (Figure 3.12).

No Man's Sky, set to be released in June 2016,[6] is a game that allows players to explore planets that are procedurally generated. According to the developers, this allows for more than 18 quintillion possible planets. Planets, their terrain, weather, flora, and fauna are all generated by the use of a single random seed number to their engine, assuring that the same planet can be visited by players using only knowledge of the seed number, in this case, the location of the planet in the virtual galaxy. The engine uses mathematical formulas that, with adjustable parameters, can mimic a diverse number of natural formations, such as the Superformula and L-systems.


#### Approaches

Search-based approach - evolutionary algorithms are used to search for good game content using principles from darwinian evolution. You need an evaluation function and a content representation.

Cellular automata approach

**Fractals**

Fractal algorithms and other noise algorithms

Grammars - 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Musikalisches_W%C3%BCrfelspiel

Cellular Automata

http://www.conwaylife.com/wiki/Main_Page

http://ncase.me/simulating/ 

Life in Life

Dwarf Fortress

#### Resources

http://pcgbook.com/

Demoscene

ProcJam

https://itch.io/jam/procjam

http://galaxykate0.tumblr.com/post/139774965871/so-you-want-to-build-a-generator

http://www.noisemachine.com/talk1/

Will Wright and Spore - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N4ScRG_reIw

#### A Quick Sprite Primer



#### More Procedural Rhetoric

#### Homework- start project 1.

mix of procedurally-driven content and authored content.

procedural sprites? 

Examples:

code to generate a sprite